Presentation Link: https://1drv.ms/p/s!AiGlBrJAMjungqhOBPejtHvEkjt09g?e=7mzEdq
Notes: 
Slide 1: Title
1. Introduction
Slide 2: background on round goby and native species
- round goby / Neogobius melanostomus
- small saltwater species that is native to the caspain sea in eastern europe.
- agressive breeder that is thought to affect native species by eating their eggs
and outcompeting other species for nice space
- First found in lake ontario in 1990 and since has grown out of control
- understanding the presence and abundance of the round goby compared to native 
species could help us understand how to conserve those native species better and see 
if the round goby is having an effect on them at all. 
They feed aggressively on insects and other small organisms found on lake and river bottoms. 
Adult round goby eat large quantities of zebra and quagga mussels, and occasionally small fish and fish eggs.
They are also thought to be tolerant to changes in substrate types and pollution which may help them outcompete
native species.
Slide 3: Focal Native Species
- Yellow perch 
yellow perch eat invertebrates and small fish. 
They spawn by laying a lot of eggs between february and july
their larvae and eggs are prey for a lot of predators like bass and walleye. 
https://www.fws.gov/species/yellow-perch-perca-flavescens
- Threespine stickleback
they spawn in the spring and summer
important prey species for trout, sculpins, and pike.
they eat various invertebrates, fish eggs, and fry.
https://www.adfg.alaska.gov/static/species/speciesinfo/_aknhp/Threespine_Stickleback.pdf
- Deepwater sculpin
once thought to be extirpated in lake ontario
very threatened by eutriphication and was previously seriously affected by DDT. 
increasing temperatures can heavily affect them becasue they need coldwater. 
Also thought to be threatened by other invasive species
they eat zooplancton and sometimes leeches, fish eggs, or clams.
https://naturecanada.ca/discover-nature/endangered-species/deepwater-sculpin/
https://www.natureconservancy.ca/en/what-we-do/resource-centre/featured-species/fishes/deepwater-sculpin.html
- Trout-perch
sensitive to rises in temperature
important source of food for larger fishes like walleye and northern pike.
spawn in the spring
eats mostly insects and crustaceans but can eat small fishes
https://fieldguide.mt.gov/speciesDetail.aspx?elcode=AFCLC01010
https://www.encyclopedia.com/science/encyclopedias-almanacs-transcripts-and-maps/trout-perch-0
- Johnny darter
tolerant to water pollution
eats mostly small copepods and waterfleas (daphnia). They also eat insects. 
they are eaten by lots of larger species like burbot, lake trout, smallmouth bass, walleyes, and yellow perch
https://www.lakesuperiorstreams.org/understanding/johnnydarter.html
- Lake trout
they eat small invertebrates when they're young but when they are older they eat mostly fish
adults can eat sculpin, alewives, smelt, minnows and more. 
https://animals.net/lake-trout/
Slide 4: Cont.
- Slimy sculpin
eats aquatic insects, crustaceons, fish eggs, and small fish
https://yukon.ca/en/slimy-sculpin
- Species TLDR
Competes for food with all chosen species (to varying degrees) except the johnny darter and lake trout.
They eat fish eggs which means they can consume all of these species as young
Slide 5: dataset explanation
- project in lake ontario starting in 1978 and continuing into 2022 to keep tabs on 
fishes of lake ontario
Trawling study - so these boats went out and fished on the bottom of the lake and recorded what they found
- records the abundances but also traits of each fish like its life stage, mass, etc. and they recorded temperature as well
- a good way to compare the abundances and health of populations because it shows both 
the round goby and other native species and has a lot of observations 
Slide 6: round goby abundance
- Another reason this is a good dataset for looking at the round goby is that we can see the increase of the round goby 
with time. In this dataset, the first observation of a round goby was in 2002 and then we can see its abundance grow
Our main objective is to figure out whether this increase in round goby abundance has anything to do with temperature, and 
if the increase has affected native species negatively
Slide 7: Hypothesis 1
1. If the temperature increases then the round goby will be positively affected, and 
the native species will be negatively affected. The round goby’s native range is warmer 
than the average temperature of the great lakes region. Thus, we suspect that as temperature
increases the round goby will feed more aggressively on other abundant species like zebra mussels
or small invertebrates. As the round goby breeds continuously throughout the year, 
increased temperatures may extend their spawning season and the number of spawning per year,
which would rapidly increase their population.
Slide 8: Hypothesis 2
2. If the round goby's relative abundance increases, then the native species abundance will 
decrease. a. When the round goby populations increase, they prey on the same species as native
fishes and can outcompete them for food 4. They also consume the eggs and young of native species
which could cause a decrease in their populations 4.
Slide 9: Methods
a. data exploration + choosing focal species
- we started by figuring out which native species we had enough data to examine in addition to the
round goby. We cleaned up our data and reformatted it as needed, and then we figured out how many
observations of each species there were. We filtered the final list by those that had 300+ 
observations. In this case that means Yellow perch, Threespine stickleback, Deepwater sculpin,
Trout-perch, Johnny darter, Lake trout, and Slimy sculpin. which left us with 7 species to 
look at. 
- We also split the data into clustered sites (dan, want to add explanation here?)
- We then compared the abundance and mass of each species at different fishing temperatures to see if more of that species were 
found at different temperatures. We included a random effect of the site. 
- For our second hypothesis we compared the abundance of each species with the abundance of the round goby
by fitting it to a linear model. We removed all datapoints from before 2002 for this, because that was when the first occurence of 
the round goby was recorded. We also removed any occurences where there was both no round goby and none of the focal native 
species. 
Slide 10: Results 1
b. statistical tests
When we looked at the effect of temperature on each species we found mostly insignificant results. Here were the ones that were signficant
indicated in green on the slide. 
Slide 11: yellow perch
the yellow perch was affected by temperature in both its abundance and its a
4. Results
5. Discussion
6. References
